Blundeuile

Of Multiplication.
Cap. 4.



What is Multiplication?
     It is the producing or bringing forth of a third number, by Multiplying two other numbers the one into the other: And it consisteth of three numbers, that is the multiplycand, the multiplyer, and the product.

What signifieth those names?
     The Multiplicand is that number which is to be multiplied, and the multiplyer is that whereby the same is multiplyed, & the product is the summe of such Multiplication: As for example, if I would multiply 4. by 3. as in saying 3. times 4. maketh 12. here the number of 4. is the Multiplycand, and the number 3. is the multiplyer, and the number 12. is the product of that Multiplycation.

What order is to be observed in multiplying, & how are those numbers to be set?
     Before I teach you the true order of multiplying, I thinke it good to set you downe a table of Multiplycation, which unlesse you learne perfectly by heart, you shall neuer multiplie readily nor quickly.

How is this Table to be read?
     In this manner 2. times 2. maketh 4. and 2. times 3. maketh 6. and 2. times 4. maketh 8. and so foorth: multiplying still one Digit by another, untill you come to 100. for this Table serveth onely for Digits, which may bee made to extend so farre as you will, and untill you have learned the foresaid Table without booke, you may helpe your selfe with this other Table of Digits made squire wise as you see here:
     In the front of which Table are set down the 9. Digits beginning on the left hande, and so proceeding to the right hand, from 1. to 9. Againe on the right side of the said Table are set downe the foresaid 9. Digits beginning a bove and so proceeding right downe from 1. to 9. the use whereof is thus, first seeke the Digit to be Multiplied in the front, and seeke the other wherby you have to multiply the same on the right hand, and the square Angle aunswering to these 2. Digits will shew the product of such Multiplication.  As for example, having to multiply, 7. by 6. I first seeke the greater Digit which is 7. in the front, and the lesser which is 6. on the right hand, the product whereof I find in the square Angle answering both to 7. and to 6. to be 42. and the like is to be observed in any 2. Digits that are of like value, as 7. times 7. the product whereof is 49.  But the first Table being perfectly learned without book, whensoever you have to multiply one number by another, you must observed these rules here following.
     First that you set downe the first figure of your multiplyer right under the first figure of the number that is to be multiplyed, on the right hand, and then orderly to place the rest of the figures of your multiplier, be the few or many, towards your left hand, directly under the rest of the figures of the number that is to bee multiplyed, for if the figures stand not in order one right over another, it will breede a confusion in your working.  Secondly you must not forget to multiply all the figures of the number that is to be multiplyed by the first figure of your multiplyer before you deale with the next multiplyer, beginning alwaies on your right hand, and so to proceed from one to another, wherby you shal make as many severall products as there be figures in your multiplyer.  Thirdly you must remember to set downe the first figure of every severall product, right under the figure of that multiplier, whereby you doe multiply, and having ended your Multiplication, draw a line under the severall products: ẏ [that] done, adde ẏ [the] severall products together according to the rules of Addtion, & the summe thereof shal be the total or general product of that Multiplication: all which rules you shall the better understand by working this example following.  Suppose then that you would know how many houres there are in a yeare, knowing first ẏ [that] a yeare consisteth of 365. daies, here because that every naturall day containeth 24 houres comprehending both day & night, you have to multiply 365. by 24. and therefore you must first set down 365. because it is the greater number, and is the multiplicand, which must alwaies stand above, & right under ẏ [that], your multiplyer which is 24. is to be set downe in his due place, according to the Rules before taught thus as you see here.
     Then say thus 4. times 5. maketh 20. & having set down a Cypher right under the 4. keep the 2. Articles in mind, then say 4. times 6. is 24. & 2. in mind is 26. here set downe 6. and keepe 2. in mind, then say 4. times 3. is 12. which with the 2. in minde maketh 14. here first set downe the 4. under the 3. and because you can proceede no further, you must therefore set downe hard by the 4. on the left hand the one Article which you had in minde, then having cancelled the first figure of the multiplyer, by making a dash through it with your penne, as you see in the example following: Proceede with the other figure of the multiplyer, saying that 2. times 5. maketh 10. wherefore set downe a Cypher right under the said 2. keeping the one Article in minde, then say, 2. times 6. is 12. and one in minde maketh 13. wherefore set downe 3. and keepe one in minde, then say 2. times 3. is 6. which with one in minde maketh 7. the wthich you must set downe: and because you have made an end to your multiplication, cancell the 2, and draw another line under the 2. severall products, that done, adde together whatsoever is contained betwixt the two lines, and you shall find the general product to be 8|760, houres.

How shall I know whether the last Multiplication be right or no:?
     By dividing the generall product by the Multiplyer, for in so doing your quotient will be like unto the first Summe that was Multiplyed, which you cannot doe, untill such time as you have learned to divide, and therefore having first shewed certaine compendious waies of Multiplication, I will the proceede to Division.


---Certaine compendious waies of Multiplication.---


When is any such way to be used?
     When the Multiplyer beginning on the right hand with one Cypher or with many, endeth on the left hand with the Digit 1. as these numbers following. 10 / 100 / 1000 / &c.

Why, what is then to be done?
     If you have to Multiply by 10. then you have no more to doe, but to set downe on the right hand of the number that is to be Multiplyed, one Cypher, if by a 100. then 2. Cyphers, if by a 1000. then 3. Cyphers, as for example: if you would Multiply 365. by 10. then by setting downe on the right hand one Cypher as hath beene said, the product will be 3|650. if you set downe 2. Cyphers the product will be 36|500. if you set down 3 Cyphers, then the product will be 365|000.

What if the number do end on the left hand with any other Digit, as 2. 3. or more, as 200 300 400?
     Then you must Muptiply the number of the Multiplicand first by that Digit, and then adde to the end of the product on the right hand all the Cyphers annexed to the said Digit, as if you would Multiply 365. by 200. First say 2. times 5. maketh 10. and 2. 6. and 1. in mind is 13. and so to proceede in Multiplying every figure of the Multiplicand by 2. and you shall finde the product to be 730. whereunto if you adde on the right hand 2. Cyphers, the whole product will be 73|000.






Text from:
https://books.google.co.jp/books?id=XDlAMljn5ioC&newbks=1&newbks_redir=0&pg=PA5#v=onepage&q&f=false

checked against:
https://books.google.co.jp/books?id=pkJy1IxC18sC&printsec=frontcover&source=gbs_ge_summary_r&cad=0#v=onepage&q&f=false





